What it’s like to work on Open Source Projects
##############################################
:date: 2013-08-20 04:43
:tags: open-source, community, social
:slug: working-on-open-source-project
:category: programming

You’ll hear the word “open” a lot.

Open means you can talk about your work publicly. Anyone from anywhere
might pop in and comment on your work. You can pop in and comment on any
other project.

Open also means people won’t be telling you what to do very much, but
rather expecting you to figure out how to contribute. Along with that,
the org chart is never kept up to date, and is probably more of a dag or
hypergraph than a tree. This is exciting and fun, but can also be
challenging to navigate.


Becoming Effective
==================


As a new employee, one of your first priorities is becoming effective at
your basic job. For example, if you are on the JS engine team, your job
is to fix bugs and add features. Fixing bugs is hard, so it will take a
lot of practice and learning to become good at it.


There are all kinds of new procedures, skills, and/or codebases to
learn, but what’s special in open-source projects is that you need to
learn how to decide what to work on. Even if you are producing
top-quality code at maximum speed, the value of that code is still
entirely dependent on how relevant the project is.


What to work on
===============

It’s not a total free-for-all. You will probably get assignments. But
the assignment may be very general, like **“make GC not suck”**. So
you’d need to figure out what that really means. And you’ll probably get
way more assignments run past you than you could ever do. So even if you
try to just do those, you’ll have to choose. And quite often assignments
are more offered than, well, assigned.


Why don’t they just tell people what to do?
===========================================

As for a open-source developer, one reason is that they are busy with
all kinds of stuff, and they don’t really have time for that. But more
importantly, they don’t know everything, so they’d really like your
ideas and your help in making decisions. And most of all, they find that
the results are far better when people choose their own projects–and
choose things that they are fired up about, whether it’s because they’ll
get to learn, they’ll get to feel badass, or for whatever reason it’s
something important to them personally.


So how do you figure out what to do?
====================================


In one word, **listen**. Talk regularly with people in and around your
area to find out what problems need solving, bugs need fixing,
enhancements are needed. In two words, **listen intelligently**. Simply
aggregating everyone else’s opinion is OK to start with, but I’d really
much rather see everyone else’s opinion blended with your own unique
point of view. Plus you’ll want to pick out the projects that you
currently have the skills to get traction on and that you’ll find
interesting. And you’ll need to figure out who really knows what’s worth
working on vs. who everyone else thinks knows what’s working on vs. who
thinks they know what’s worth working on but really doesn’t.

One lesson from my experience is that figuring out what to work on is
pretty hard. So if your first few assignments seem to turn out not to be
of much value, don’t sweat it. (Often new people are offered
low-priority stuff or weird ideas so they can learn without blocking
ongoing critical work.) Just keep talking, listening, trying things out,
and learning.

Also: watch out for tar pits. There are projects out there to work on
that are ill-defined, or that are popular to talk about but not really
useful, or that will have an ever-expanding scope, or that have been
tried 3 times and have always failed. You want to work where you will
have maximum impact, not minimum. So if you find yourself in one of
these, call for help: get out or get someone to help you get out.

Becoming Visible
================

I think visibility is important in pretty much any software company
bigger than `Dunbar’s number`_, but in such a fluid environment, it’s
even more important. If you’re after external rewards, your managers and
peers need to know about the great stuff you’re doing. If you’re after
getting to work on the big cool projects and such, people need to know
who you are and what you can do.

You don’t need to worry about becoming super-visible immediately, but
you can start taking steps to improve your future visibility right away:

-  **Starting a blog is an excellent thing to do.** You may think you
   don’t have much to write about. But you do: your work and your
   experiences at Mozilla. There is almost certainly someone out there
   who’s interested. I started this blog talking about abstruse aspects
   of program analysis, and even that found an audience.
-  Talking to people regularly in person or on IRC is also great, of
   course. “What are you working on” is a good conversation starter and
   likely to be reciprocated.
-  Asking people for help automatically lets them know what you’re
   working on.

   Helping other people gives them a chance to see what you can do.

There are also of course all the mailing lists and newsgroups and
Yammer. I have the sense that a lot of the talk on there is not that
productive so I’m hesitant to recommend spending more time on them to a
new person, but YMMV.

Being Visible
=============

The common notion of visibility is mostly abouttelling other people
about your accomplishments (which for us extends also to your
capabilities), but because we are so open, there is another side, which
is letting people see you working.

We are supposed to be “all open and stuff”. It can be intimidating to
work out in public where anyone could see you fail or criticize you. I
highly recommend responding by embracing it. In Bugzilla, use the
assignee field to show what you’re working on. Post half-baked design
ideas before you start coding. Post WIPs (works in progress) to let
people see your crappy incomplete code. If someone asks you to do
something and you don’t have time or think it’s a bad idea, say so right
away.

The advantage of this is that you don’t have much to worry about. No
one’s going to discover what you’ve been working on for the past 2
months and criticize you for wasting your time, because they would have
been able to give you feedback right away. No one’s going to complain
you’re not working on their favorite bug, because they can either see
that you are, or you’ve told them you’re not. If it’s all in the open,
and no one’s complaining, it’s fair for you to think you’re on the right
track.

Just to make sure you don’t think I’m (totally) crazy, I should point
out that there are times to be less open. When you’re working on a
proposal to change procedures or do a crazy project, or a presentation,
or something like that, it does make sense to get feedback from a small
group before taking it public. And that is in fact OK around here.

Becoming Influential
====================

You probably have all kinds of ideas about how to make the web better,
or the JS engine, or Bugzilla, or our review process. That’s excellent.

But don’t be too surprised if at first most of your ideas are met with
skepticism, misunderstanding, refusal, or are just ignored. There are
way more ideas out there than there are people to work on them, so
everyone already has 35 great ideas they’d love to try. They’d have to
decide that your new idea is better than those 35 in order to think
about it all that much. Or maybe they’ve already heard that idea and
they rank it #67, so they’re not that motivated to think about it again.
Getting ideas heard can be hard.

But also, don’t be discouraged if your ideas don’t seem to move people
very much. It doesn’t mean your ideas are bad. It doesn’t mean no one’s
ever going to listen to them. It does mean that if you want to be heard
you’re going to have to rise to the challenge and work at it.

The easiest way to get more attention for your ideas is if you have
“open source street cred”. If you are new, there is of course a good
chance that you don’t have any yet. But as you become effective and
visible, you will get that street cred and more chance to be heard.

What to do in the meantime?
===========================

I don’t have a recipe. I recommend just to keep trying. That’s also why
I said not to get discouraged. You can try an idea on different people.
Maybe the first 5 are not too interested but the 6th has time and wants
to work on it. You can try it over time. Maybe when people first hear it
is unfamiliar and weird, but after talking with you about it over time,
they come to see its merits. You can write code or do some experiments
to test the idea and show how it might work. You can change and refine
the idea to see if different versions get more attention. If you keep
trying and pay attention to what works and what doesn’t, you will gain
skill in promoting your ideas.

One thing I think is clearly effective in getting heard is service. If
you help other people solve problems, make their jobs easier, or help
them get their ideas heard and implemented, there’s a good chance
they’ll be more inclined to listen to you and help you out. That can go
a long way even before you have any street cred.

Conclusion
==========

If you’re effective, visible, and influential, then you’ve made it. It’s
only a matter of time that will get you up the ladder.

Related Readings
================

1. `An Experience in Contributing to Open Source`_ by Alex Vaccaro
2. `Software engineers should write`_ by Shubhro Saha

.. _An Experience in Contributing to Open Source: http://stillflowing.net/2014/12/21/an-experience-in-contributing-to-open-source/
.. _Dunbar’s number: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar's_number
.. _:http://www.shubhro.com/2014/12/27/software-engineers-should-write/
